---
title: "Bandwidth vs. Brilliance: A Functional Information Model for American Rugby Development"
date: 2025-08-13
layout: post
---

Notice
This paper was human reviewed and human edited. Research and development was aided by AI tools for transcription, summarization, and drafting support. Feel free to counter any claims or findings. If something is incorrect, please provide feedback. Reach us at contact@biasware.com

## Abstract

American rugby has grown in participation and potential, but the game
suffers from a systemic information bottleneck. Coaching knowledge and
best practices remain scattered and under-leveraged across the nation.
This paper introduces the concept of **Functional Bits of Information**
-- concise, high-impact coaching insights -- and presents a model for
reclaiming, structuring, and distributing such high-value data using
AI-powered video processing. By compressing raw footage into indexed,
searchable coaching knowledge, American rugby can increase its
"bandwidth" for learning and bridge the gap between grassroots
enthusiasm and elite-level expertise.

## 1. Introduction: The American Rugby Bottleneck

Rugby in the U.S. is not lacking effort -- it's lacking coherence.
Despite passionate growth at the grassroots, the coaching ecosystem
remains fragmented and geographically isolated, with many programs
under-resourced[1][2].
Youth initiatives in under-served communities face uphill battles for
access to coaching
resources[1],
and even well-established clubs often operate in silos without efficient
knowledge-sharing. As one insider quipped:

> "We didn't lose the playbook, we lost the bandwidth."

This bottleneck refers to the limited flow of actionable information
through the rugby community. Key lessons from elite levels often fail to
reach local coaches, and valuable insights gained in one region don't
propagate nationally. To diagnose the problem, we introduce the term
**Functional Bits of Information**. In information theory, a "bit" is
the smallest unit of data and represents a choice between two
possibilities[3].
Claude Shannon's classic theory measures information by reduction of
uncertainty -- even meaningless noise can count as "information" if it's
novel[4].
By contrast, *functional* bits are the pieces of information that carry
*meaningful, applicable knowledge* for rugby performance. For example, a
two-second video clip demonstrating perfect ruck body position can
impart a coaching concept far more effectively than hours of
unstructured game footage. The aim of this paper is to show how
identifying and sharing these functional bits can vastly increase
American rugby's coaching "bandwidth."

## 2. Functional Bits: A New Lens for Coaching

Drawing inspiration from Shannon's information theory (entropy,
compression, signal-vs-noise), we differentiate raw data from
*functional information*. Shannon taught us that one bit of information
is gained when uncertainty is halved -- e.g. learning the result of a
fair coin toss yields one
bit[5].
Crucially, however, *information is not the same as
meaning*[4].
A random sequence of rugby match events or an endless scrimmage video
might be information-rich in the Shannon sense, yet offer little insight
to a coach. **Functional information** in rugby refers to data that
actually reduces uncertainty *in decision-making or skill execution on
the field*. In practice, this means distilling coaching videos and stats
down to the moments that matter. For instance, a 2-second clip of a
perfectly executed ruck clear-out (with ideal body positioning) is worth
far more than 10,000 frames of typical game tape -- it's a *functional
bit* that a coach or player can immediately learn from.

To clarify, consider three tiers of video content:

-   **Raw Footage:** Full match or practice recordings. These are high
    in volume and entropy but require significant effort to extract
    needle in a haystack -- the useful patterns are obscured by noise.
-   **Highlight Reels:** Edited compilations of big plays or scores.
    These have entertainment value and some instructional value, but
    can bias toward flashy moments rather than fundamental skills.
-   **Functional Insights:** Curated clips or data points tied to
    specific skills, decisions, or scenarios. These are context-rich and
    formations against blitz defense").

To make video truly useful for coaching, it needs to be **searchable,
structured, and context-aware** rather than a raw
timeline[6].
Advances in sports analytics underscore this need: modern performance
analysis systems link tagged video to data for precise contextual
review[7].
A single meaningful clip, well-described, functions like a compressed
file -- carrying extensive coaching knowledge in a small package. By
intelligently *compressing* hours of practice film into a library of
functional bits, we retain the "brilliance" (key insights) while
discarding redundancy. The next section examines how the current
American rugby pipeline fails to do this, and the consequences of
operating with low information bandwidth.

## 3. The Status Quo: Rugby's Broken Information Pipeline

Currently, the flow of coaching knowledge in American rugby is more
trickle than stream. **Training camps with no long-term memory:** Youth
and all-star camps often conclude without any systematic recording of
what was taught or learned. Players and coaches disperse, taking their
personal memories but leaving no institutional archive. Without shared
video or notes, each camp might as well reinvent the wheel. **Coaches
repeating drills in silos:** Because there is little communication
between distant clubs or regions, coaches tend to rely on what they know
or can learn
informally[2].
Recent studies note that many coaches acquire knowledge through
self-directed means and approach new information inefficiently, without
broad
collaboration[2].
The result is redundant effort -- the same fundamental drills or fixes
are "discovered" repeatedly in isolation, rather than building on each
other. **Legacy knowledge dying with older coaches:** A generation of
experienced American coaches has accumulated practical wisdom (tips for
teaching scrummaging to novices, creative drills for player
conditioning, etc.), but much of it lives in their heads. When they
retire or leave the game, that knowledge often departs too. There is no
robust mechanism to capture their lessons for posterity -- no nationwide
coaching library or knowledge base to pass on their insights. Over time,
this constitutes a tragic knowledge drain.

One glaring gap is the **information flow from elite to grassroots**.
Elite environments (national teams, pro clubs) develop cutting-edge
strategies and techniques, but those seldom filter down effectively to
high school or youth levels. A 2022 case study of a professional club's
High-Performance Unit (HPU) in England found 18 separate processes for
player management, and identified significant issues in how data and
knowledge were
handled[8][9].
Notably, they observed problems in the transition "from data to
knowledge" -- a lack of process to turn raw info into shared actionable
wisdom[10][11].
If such issues exist in a pro club, they are magnified in a country as
large as the U.S. without an integrated system. Indeed, coaching leaders
worry that the *knowledge gap between elite and grassroots levels will
continue to widen*, leaving community coaches further behind modern best
practices[12][13].

Real-world examples show how poor knowledge flow can cost teams or
create controversy. A recent high-profile incident was the *Jac Morgan
ruck controversy* during the 2025 British & Irish Lions tour. In the
second Test, Wales flanker Jac Morgan executed a ruck clean-out that
many viewed as illegal, directly preceding the Lions' match-winning try.
Officials reviewed the play for minutes before deciding not to penalize
it[14].
After the game, Wallabies coaches were incensed, arguing Morgan's
clear-out *"clearly contravened law 9.20... a player must not make
contact with an opponent above the line of the
shoulders."*[15].
Rugby Australia's leadership sought an explanation from World Rugby,
calling for accountability and consistent
interpretation[16].
This ruckgate episode laid bare a breakdown in shared understanding --
whether it was referees, players, or coaches, somewhere the knowledge
pipeline failed. Either Morgan had been coached in a technique others
